# Chain Theories

I wanted to present a theory classification which I've been informally using in
my own reasoning, and some of the interesting places where I work with new
instances of these theories. I call them "chain theories," because they are 
modeled on the theory of "chain reactions". Let me explain chain reactions 
first, then.

# Chain reactions - our prototype chain theory

In nuclear physics, what you need to know is that everything wants to be Iron.
It's not something amazing about iron necessarily, but lighter elements would
like to "fuse" together to become heavier, and heavier elements than iron want
to "fission" apart. I am using the words "like" and "want" and I mean it in 
the sense that the books on my desk "want" to fall to the floor -- they are
not necessarily close to doing so; in fact, they are quite stable in their 
present configurations: but it would be energetically favorable for them to 
fall to the floor, and if they did, it would be absurdly unlikely that they 
could get back the energy to jump back on my table again.

A nucleus is perhaps a bit more like a stack of books. One simple fact is that
as you pile them higher and higher, the stack is more willing to collapse. This
also happens for nuclei.

A chain reaction occurs with very heavy nuclei, nuclei that are just barely 
holding together and really "want" to fall apart, but lack the immediate 
stimulus to do so. A free neutron can fly into such a nucleus and cause it to 
break apart. Usually they break apart into a couple of big "chunks" but leave 
a bunch of other particles flying off. Protons and electrons and other charged
particles often get scattered by the cloud of electrons surrounding a nucleus,
so they aren't quite as important as neutrons, which have no charge and can 
ram straight into a nucleus with plenty of force.

You only get a chain reaction with a certain "critical mass", and the principle
here is very easy to understand: at the critical mass, each fission will on 
average create one more fission. Above this mass, there is more stuff that a 
neutron might hit, so perhaps one fission might on average create 1.2 more 
fissions. Those fissions will then create 1.44 fissions. Those will create 
1.728 fissions.

This is an exponential growth: by 20 links in the chain, you will have created 
38 fissions at a time, by 40 one fission will create 1470 fissions, by 80 one 
fission will have created 2 million fissions, and by 160 steps you will have 
created 4.7 trillion fissions. Even a tiny bit of exponential growth will 
rapidly grow in this way. 

The most general form of this idea is that you have some generic event G, and
the rule is, "The system is in a chain reaction when G makes G more probable." 
It is a little hard to define the event G in the nuclear case, but it is 
something like "seeing a nucleus fissioning." The system is in a chain reaction
when seeing a nucleus fissioning makes it more likely to, in the future, see a
nucleus fissioning.

# Evolution is a chain theory

Perhaps the most successful chain theory in our world is not a part of nuclear 
physics at all -- it is the theory of biological evolution through natural 
selection.

If you assume that organisms have inheritable characteristics, then those 
characteristics which are more likely to be inherited by the next generation
will become common through the gene pool by the same sort of chain reaction,
albeit at a glacial pace due to the years between generations. 

This illustrates something crucial about chain theories which I hope is 
worthwhile: the chain reaction is unfortunately only a basic and microscopic 
description of what's going on, and it needs to be "filled in" by a 

# Political chain theory


Notice that the 
inheritance does not /strictly/ have to be g



