I want to first establish a perspective. I think that your perspective on the
purpose of copyright will more or less color the rest of what you say about it.
So for example a lot of people seem to view copyright as something like being
recognized as an author, being given due credit for your works, being notified
about derivative works -- all of that sounds very positive, and so copyright 
becomes this issue of legitimacy. Or, there's another perspective, where you 
take the words literally: copy/right, right-to-copy, so a right to control the
extent of your work, to control where it goes, who it influences, how it gets incorporated into society. And there's another perspective
where it's associated with paying artists for the works that they have given
our society. There's a sort of perspective that artists aren't well-off, are
always getting cheated out of what they've earned. And that we should help 
them.

But for various reasons I no longer see it in any of these ways anymore.

I now see copyright purely legalistically. If you're asking "do I have a 
copyright?" you are literally just asking "can I sue someone?" and if you have 
a copyright license then that means "no, they can't sue you." It's purely a 
legal matter to be handled in the context of lawsuits, by some judge who's 
going to decide what the law says.

What a perspective difference! Maybe the best place to see this is in the 
filesharing lawsuits. A big band like Metallica no longer has any control over 
the extent of their work -- people are going to sing it, quote lyrics, listen
to it on public radio broadcasts, and so forth. Nobody can deprive such a 
famous band of their due credit for those songs, everyone recognizes their 
authorship, and their impact on popular music is no longer something which 
they have power over. They have also been made wildly financially successful 
for the music they produced.

Yet, as a band, they were one of the loudest supporters of copyright and its
use in the filesharing lawsuits. It could not be that they're worried about 
someone not perceiving them as the authors of the songs *Fade to Black*, or 
*Enter Sandman*, or *One*. It also could not be that they wanted to control the
bands that were influenced by them and the reach of their cultural sway. It 
could not be that they were feeling impoverished and let down by society. (Or, 
if Metallica did feel those ways, they were wrong.) It is purely through seeing
copyright as a right to sue that these lawsuits make sense.

So when you're an artist like me, this perspective really shifts the question.
I'm not asking "am I getting credit for my work?" but really, "Am I going to
sue you?" And if you're me in particular, you think, "I don't want to sue 
anyone! I'm not financially successful and I don't get much credit, but 
honestly, I really don't want to sue you." The next question is therefore, how
can I get away from copyright? How can I "break the cycle" of lawsuits?

Well then you start to get into legal matters. I'll just touch on one in a 
little bit of detail: licenses and contracts. A license is just an official 
statement that you've been given permission, it's something you can point to 
in a lawsuit and say, "but I was given permission!" That permission, that 
license, might say it's worldwide, royalty-free, and irrevocable, and although
I don't know what happens if you try to revoke a piece of paper which says that
it's irrevocable -- I mean, does it just revoke the word 'irrevocable' in 
passing? What happens when an unstoppable ball hits an immovable wall? -- I can
imagine that it makes it very hard to marshal a lawsuit.

Now that's nice and in some sense it puts a restriction on me, and it can put 
restrictions on you, but the license itself is some sort of gift I'm making to
you. I could maybe stop giving out those gifts at any time. So one difference
between the BSD and the MIT license is that the MIT license gives you an
explicit permission to sublicense works. If I stop being willing to give out 
these licenses and then start to file lawsuits, maybe someone could say, "I 
didn't get it from you, I got it from someone with a valid MIT license." 

Wa

So there are two different theories on this, and one we can call "public license"
and the other we can call "copyleft." The simplest ones are the public 
licenses, which say that, aside from some occasional details like giving the 
author due credit, we're going to give you a license to 

3:37:40