# Observations on weight loss

When I was at Cornell I was a young and impressionable kid who was clearly 
beginning to have a weight problem -- and when I left Cornell I weighed 270
pounds (122 kg, 19 stone). So I resolved to lower my weight by a method called
the Atkins diet. If you do not know the Atkins diet, the essential goal is to 
trick your body into believing that you are starving by consuming very few
carbohydrates. If your body thinks you are starving it apparently tries to burn
fats to recoup the lost energy, and you lose fat. Atkins is meant to be a high
meat, high fat, indulgent approach to losing weight.

I didn't make it; I failed at the very first stage of the Atkins diet, which 
was called "induction". During induction, you have to eat almost zero carbs, 
which launches you headfirst into pseudo-starvation. My first meal was a
delicious steak dinner, my second meal was a disgusting amount of eggs and 
bacon, my third meal was a disquieting lunch of fried chicken with
the breading pulled off. By the dinner I didn't want to see meat or fat again,
and ate a nice, delicious salad and a slice of pizza. Spending a couple of 
weeks without wraps and salsa, pizza and garlic knobs, or salads -- it sounded
absolutely horrible to me. I've always liked a variety of foods; this was a 
dull monotony before it started. 

So there I was, studying physics at Cornell. I'll tell you what nerdy thing I
really liked about the diet. It was that Atkins converted all foods to about
the same density. He wanted you to be getting 60% of your calories from fat,
which on a 2500 kcal diet would be 6 oz. fat and 9 oz. protein. That's a great
way to go. You can visualize it. In terms of oils, which are about the same 
density as water and butter, a tablespoon is half an ounce.[1]

# Energy continuity theorem
The "common sense" of weight loss is what we call in physics a continuity 
equation. A continuity equation just says:

  1. There is a box.
  2. There is stuff in the box. It accumulates at a certain rate.
  3. This rate of accumulation is equal to the flow of stuff in, minus the 
     flow of stuff out.

The "stuff" in this case is chemical energy. Your body uses fat to store 
chemical energy and "burns" fat to make more chemical energy. Chemical energy
is measured by simply burning it up and seeing how much it heats up water; a
kcal (or sometimes big-C Calorie) of energy is the amount of chemical energy
you need to heat up a liter of water by 1 degree Celsius. Don't ask me why the
American system of nutritional energy measurement is half-metric; I don't know.

According to this wisdom, your body is a box of this kind, and your rate of
weight gain is equal to the flow of calories in (eaten) minus the flow out. You
principally use those calories to stay warm or to walk around. Your normal 
usage is around 2000 - 2500 kcal; you can bump it up by about 250 kcal in a 
given day by taking a one-hour walk, doing an hour of weightlifting, or playing
a half-hour of some sport where you run and sweat a lot. Sixteen such exercise
periods equals one pound of fat.

Alternately, 250 kcal is in a bottle of fruit juice or a 20 oz bottle of Coke.
Fruit juice is only a little more healthy in terms of its vitamins, nothing 
more -- if you wanted them to eat fruit, give them actual fruit, not sugary 
fruit-flavored drinks. Heck, if you want to know why kids are overweight, just 
run these numbers: they drink one or two more sugar-drinks per day than they 
used to, but they don't get 30 minutes more exercise for it.

While this picture is totally correct -- at least, as long as you really digest
everything you eat, which as far as I know you do -- in my experience it is 
also quite limited. I want to talk about some of the ways in which our biology
limits this discussion.

# Automatic costs
I had a friend who told me, "that concert looks fun, but at $35 it's too 
expensive for me." I asked him how much he spent at the grocery store per day,
and he looked puzzled. He didn't know; he had to work it out. If you wouldn't
notice an extra $1 or $2 per day in your grocery bill, then you're not
concerned enough about money to be concerned about spending $35 / month on 
random concert tickets.

My point is not that you should starve yourself for a week to go to a concert,
but to make you think about what we in physics call "noise." A single 35 euro
concert ticket could "blend in" with the noise if you're not watching your 
expenses down to the a-dollar-a-day level. If you don't know how much you spend
at the vending machine over a typical day, and you have to pause to work it 
out, then this is you.

The same thing happens with calories, sadly. The problem is, if you just 
naively go running some more, you'll become more hungry, too: consumption tends
to grow to match. And if you diet, you'll at some point say "I'm cold, I should
put on a sweater" and relax in front of the television for an extra program. 

Counting calories works if you count them -- but your brain doesn't know the 
numbers; it only knows feelings and dispositions. You're going to have to 
*feel* those numbers if you want your brain to understand dieting. Most diets 
promise that you'll never feel them: that's why most diets don't work.

There are some diets which work by "feelings" but only highly indirectly: if 
you just look at vegetarians versus meat-eaters, you'll see that the waistlines
of the former are much smaller than the waistlines of the latter. Why? Because
the vegetables are much less dense and take more time to eat, so it takes 
longer before your brain finally says "Okay, I'm done."

Automatic costs are also prolific in day-to-day life. If you go on a diet, 
you'll be more likely to eat extra cereal in the morning. And, for that matter,
the easy way to cut down on your cereal consumption is to start eating from a 
smaller bowl, put the big ones far away, where you'll have to dig through pots 
and pans before you can get at them.

So, too, the best way to deal with day-to-day temptation is to increase its 
costs. How can you kill the desire to snack? By not keeping snack foods around
the house. Make it so that you have to drive to the nearest supermarket to get
that bag of chips -- then you'll only down a bag of chips when you're throwing
a party with friends. Just a little increase in an everyday cost can be felt by
your brain, if you program it right.

And how do you make sure that you don't buy too much food at the supermarket?
Just don't go to the supermarket on an empty stomach. Take a food which you 
don't normally snack on, like baby carrots, and insist on a ritual where you 
consume it before going shopping. This removes some more daily irrationality.
Remember, you can afford to be $35 irrational every month, if you are $1 less
irrational every day. If you haven't noticed your irrationality per day, then
even the large indulgences will fit into the noise and make no practical
difference.

# Calories are not the enemy
What makes you hungry? Low blood sugar, an empty stomach, having lost weight
(via ghrelin production)...

Not sure where this is going.

Except for injury, exercise *feels good*. An hour of exercise leaves you with a
drained rush which feels much more satisfying than that drained slump you get 
after an hour behind the television. Things which boost your metabolism tend to
feel good. Heck, a sugar high feels pretty good. If you're going to paint 
calories as your enemy, you're inevitably going to say that *feeling good* is
your enemy. Well, that's unpleasant, and it makes people either lazy or else 
they relapse. 

So basically, you need to know that when you gain weight, your body just adds
fat cells. When you lose weight, your fat cells notice that they're getting too
small and send a signalling hormone called ghrelin, which makes you feel deeply
hungry. So gaining weight is free and relatively unmitigated -- especially if
you drink sugars like, well, sugar, or the high-fructose corn syrup in cola. 
One well-known thing about sugars is that, unlike starches and glucose, they 
don't stimulate your insulin response enough. In the case of fructose, it 
doesn't stimulate the insulin response at all. Insulin is a chemical signal 
which helps to regulate your blood sugar, so you


[1] One thing that bugged me about the Atkins numbers was that they never 
really added up.If you work these numbers out, 6 oz fat is 12 tablespoons which
is one and a half sticks of butter. That always seemed very difficult to eat 
without snacking on chips, snacking on nuts, eating lots of cheese, or a deep
fryer. 9 oz protein is seemingly contradicted by the written materials; I never
saw anyone tell me that on the Atkins diet, I'd have to at least skip breakfast
to eat a 12 oz steak. When I started Atkins I already knew this and had 
concluded that this starvation state made your digestion really inefficient, 
but my short experience with getting disgusted by the induction phase suggests
that on the Atkins diet, meat might indeed get so tedious and repetitive that 
you never again eat a 12 oz steak.