Posted in reply to http://jacquesmattheij.com/life-as-a-service :

The situation we face is a remnant of antiquity. Once, the ownership of property was literally lordship, attacking those who were weaker and proposed to use your land in ways you did not approve, a sort of constant 'turf war' among gangs moderated by our essential civility but enforced, when push came to shove, with bloodshed. A feedback theory holds: so just as natural selection is a feedback theory for biology, we can say too that the nations which could best mobilize a war-machine for their "turf" won out, while others less successful died in the competition. The upshot is this: the bureaucracy that you're presently lamenting is actually one of the few efficient ways to marshal resources on the massive scale of modern governance. I know you feel that it's inefficient, but the things that you think are "more efficient" are often tremendously insecure. Modern China is a good picture of not only the amount that a leaner government can do, but also the problems that it has with corruption (a lack of accountability) and isolation (a lack of participation by the people). Even modern militaries, with their tiny unelected governing class, require a massive bureaucratic infrastructure to get anything done.

Looked at this way, there is both more clarity and more confusion. Of course you don't really "get land" when you buy it; you aren't buying *land*, you are buying a *property deed* -- the right, given by the government which *actually* owns the territory, to use that land in certain ways. And of course there is nowhere else you can go -- it's like trying to find a corner of the planet without life on it; any free space would have been occupied by a flurry of new governments which wanted to show that they could efficiently occupy and defend that new turf -- unless that land were well and truly inhospitable to anyone, including you. There are some exceptions like Sealand and people who build floating islands, but they're relatively few and far between. And of course, if you wish to live on this land which was so nicely conquered and secured for you by this government -- of course you will have to obey their laws and pay them as they desire. And though you struggle with the fact that you didn't choose the country, of course before you were legally responsible, your parents were legally responsible for you; and presumably they made the choice on your behalf while filling out the paperwork you were born into.

It's more confusing because it's astonishing that even in principle we are still playing this game. We like to think that we, as civilized folk, have gotten beyond the level where fistfights are used to settle property disputes. Why is that threat the ultimate basis for our nations' existence, then? I don't have a clear answer. Part of it has to do with the fact that there are people who would prefer to intimidate and terrorize rather than enjoy civil discourse, and our nations, being well-evolved to this threat, must be able to put such bastards down. But that doesn't account for the sheer diversity in international relations. International politics is a free market of ideologies in competition. Free-as-in-unregulated markets do not always give an optimum choice, especially not when oligopolies dominate. Did you want better choices? That means more competition. Did you really want more competition? That's a powerful and hard-to-answer question.
