# Atlas Reminded #

I was, at one point in my youth, heavily involved with a libertarian 
philosophical movement called Objectivism, focused around the writings of Ayn 
Rand. But since I have grown some further wisdom, the failures of my old belief 
system have become too plain for me to see: so that now, when I hear for 
example that Terry Goodkind's later *Sword of Truth* novels become an 
objectivist satire of communist ideology, I just have to think, "What a shame. 
Those first few books were so good."

Ayn Rand's philosophy is developed in her novels, which are massive heavy-
handed tomes. There are many criticisms worth making here: that all of the sex 
has a rape subtext, that she beats you over the head with the same message over 
and over, and that she seems to prefer to write an idealized version of herself 
into her own novels, with the public kowtowing to her character's clear 
supremacy. The subject of this article's namesake, /Atlas Shrugged/, for 
example, is the question "Who is John Galt?" -- and the climax is Ayn Rand 
going on a 50-page tirade about John Galt's philosophy -- which, 
coincidentally, is her own.

But let us step away from these novels and focus upon the central beliefs, and 
let us see why more wisdom is necessary.

## The Metaphysical Basics ##

I wish to begin with two quotes, one by Ayn Rand, and another by an active 
researcher who I respect. This was written on [nymag.com]
(http://nymag.com/arts/books/features/60120/): 

	Whenever Ayn Rand met someone new--an acolyte who’d traveled cross-country 
	to study at her feet, an editor hoping to publish her next novel--she would 
	open the conversation with a line that seems destined to go down as one of 
	history’s all-time classic icebreakers: “Tell me your premises.”

As for the other quote, Scott Aaronson is a quantum complexity researcher who 
wrote a blog post about [the top ten signs that a mathematical breakthrough is 
wrong](http://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=304). The last element on his list 
is the one that has been etched into my memory:

    10. The techniques just seem too wimpy for the problem at hand. Of all ten 
	tests, this is the slipperiest and hardest to apply--but also the decisive 
	one in many cases. As an analogy, suppose your friend in Boston blindfolded 
	you, drove you around for twenty minutes, then took the blindfold off and 
	claimed you were now in Beijing. Yes, you do see Chinese signs and pagoda 
	roofs, and no, you can’t immediately disprove him — but based on your 
	knowledge of both cars and geography, isn’t it more likely you’re just in 
	Chinatown? I know it’s trite, but this is exactly how I feel when I see 
	(for example) a paper that uses category theory to prove NL≠NP. We start in 
	Boston, we end up in Beijing, and at no point is anything resembling an 
	ocean ever crossed.

There is a mix of both of these when I read Rand's metaphysical structure. She 
will gladly tell you her premises, but those premises are too weak to justify 
the structure that they are being used to construct.

Fpr example, the Objectivist will tell you that "existence exists." This is 
something that we might recognize as a tautology -- in other words, if 
something called "existence" *didn't* exist after some fashion, we'd hardly be 
right in calling it "existence" in the first place. And I think that this is 
the point of this particular phrasing, as opposed to, say, "reality exists". 
The Objectivist wants it to sound like a trivial, defined, tautological, 
unarguable truth, a matter of mere semantics.

But that's not how they use the actual concept. They want this concept to carry 
a heavy philosophical weight -- and a tautologies are not load-bearing beams. 
So, they want to use this to state that some things exist -- rather than 
nothing. I think a far better argument is that we are existent things, 
therefore some things exist. They want you to come to recognize that reality -- 
existence -- rules over your conscious experience: that fantasies cannot become 
your reality. Implicit here is the relative uselesness of fantasy, and the 
Objectivist wants to emphasize that you must engage with your real 
circumstances.

These might all be interesting conclusions: but as Aaronson's analogy goes, 
they are Beijing to our Boston. How do we get from one side of the world to the 
other in a couple short paragraphs?

To elucidate this, I will give another example. The other major Objectivist 
metaphysical premise goes by the name "A is A" -- it is an axiom of identity. 
Taken the way it's stated, this seems to be totally tautological: of course 
something is equal to itself. What could possibly follow from this useless 
aspect of the word "equal"?

Here's how the Objectivist sees this. "Well, everything has a specific nature 
-- specific properties and so on, and A = A really enshrines this by saying 
that two things are equal if they have the same properties: and that properties 
are self-consistent.  In short, everything has an identity, and those 
identities are distinct from other things with different identities. This means 
that reality has a coherent identity of its own: which means that reality 
itself is self-consistent, and that we may come to know its nature."

If you try to study how these ideas are actually coming forth, you can see that 
what's really happening is that the argument does not really ever use "A = A." 
The argument instead looks like this: "Every thing has a self-consistent 
nature, Reality is a thing, therefore reality has a self-consistent nature." 
The premises -- premises which Ayn Rand is *not* telling you -- are that 
everything has a self-consistent nature and that reality is like everything 
else in this regard. But those premises are meaty things, and are not 
tautologies like "A is A."

Indeed, these added propositions are intuitions about the world. Basically all 
of the axioms are intuitions. And this presents a real paradox for Objectivism: 
because the fundamental hope for Objectivism is to ground all human emotion, 
and all interpretation of reality, in cold, hard, objective logic. As Rand's 
*Philosophy: Who Needs It?* argues:

	Your only choice is whether you define your philosophy by a conscious, 
	rational, disciplined process of thought and scrupulously logical 
	deliberation -- or let your subconscious accumulate a junk heap of 
	unwarranted conclusions, false generalizations, undefined contradictions, 
	undigested slogans, unidentified wishes, doubts and fears, thrown together 
	by chance, but integrated by your subconscious into a kind of mongrel 
	philosophy and fused into a single, solid weight: self-doubt, like a ball 
	and chain in the place where your mind's wings should have grown. 

But as I've shown above, the logic is just for show: the basis for Objectivism 
is in fact deep metaphysical intuitions that we have about our world. We have 
this intuition that we are not sitting inside a dream -- that we are instead 
cognizant of an external world which we can know and model and understand. The 
problem is that our intuitions do not come to us by a disciplined process of 
thought, and are not part of a scrupulous logical deliberation. They are just 
things which seem true to us. Where Ayn Rand wants to avoid the junk heap, she 
does it by sweeping it under a carpet and pretending that it is not there. 

Probably the best voice on the value of intuition comes from Kant, whose 
analogy in the *Critique of Pure Reason* comes readily to my mind:

    The light dove, cleaving the air in her free flight, and feeling its 
	resistance, might imagine that its flight would be still easier in empty 
	space.  ... All thought must, directly or indirectly, by way of certain 
	characters, relate ultimately to intuitions, and therefore, with us, to 
	sensibility, because in no other way can an object be given to us.

In wishing to clear away Rand's "junk heap", we defeat ourselves by wishing to 
take wing in the vacuum of space: and if we truly followed Rand's advice, our 
mind's wings would have nothing to push on, to keep us flying. We must 
acknowledge these intuitions simply because we have no other choice. We must 
base our philosophies in our subjective "junk heaps" because we are subjects. 
Rand wants you to *compute* that reality is knowable, but I maintain that you 
have to *feel* it.

## The Ethics Problem ##

While Objectivists have their metaphysics totally backwards, their ethics is as 
non-orientable as a Mobius strip: follow it out far enough and it can suddenly 
reverse its direction, making your previous blessings into sins, and sins into 
blessings.

The most obvious case to be made is the one of altruism, which in Objectivist 
philosophy must be distinguished from benevolence: in benevolence, you promote 
the good of others; in altruism, you sacrifice some share of your own well-
being to promote the good of others. Objectivists might have done better if 
they had used the word "sacrifice" and thus said that they were generally 
opposed to self-sacrifice.

How do they get to this end-point, where they disagree with self-sacrifice? As 
*Atlas Shrugged* says:

	For centuries, the battle of morality was fought between those who claimed 
	that your life belongs to God and those who claimed that it belongs to your 
	neighbors - between those who preached that the good is self-sacrifice for 
	the sake of ghosts in heaven and those who preached that the good is self-
	sacrifice for the sake of incompetents on earth. And no one came to say 
	that your life belongs to you and that the good is to live it. 

In other words, the Objectivist has decided to "take her life in her own hands" 
and thus become essentially self-serving. Objectivism promotes libertarian 
political ideals as best granting you the freedom to act this way: thus it says 
that governments must butt-out and allow you to pursue your rational self-
interests. It is believed that you will be kind to others as part of a communal 
"tit-for-tat" strategy: if you are unkind to another person, they will be more 
likely to be unkind to you. 

Now, there are many known problems with this ideology. For example, from day 
one, Objectivism has had to deal with the chiefly-libertarian problem of fraud. 
Many libertarians define the essence of wrongdoing as "initiation of force," 
but it is hard to see how defrauding someone (or any sort of lying) counts as a 
wrongdoing in this sense. For example, if I successfully spread a rumor that a 
company is about to release an exciting new product even when they are not, I 
can turn a profit both from the excitement of the investors buying up stock, 
and then another profit from their disappointment when the company releases an 
official statement saying that they have no such plans.

Here is what Rand has to say about the matter in *Atlas Shrugged*:

	Honesty is the recognition of the fact that the unreal is unreal and can 
	have no value, that neither love nor fame nor cash is a value if obtained 
	by fraud -- that an attempt to gain a value by deceiving the mind of others 
	is an act of raising your victims to a position higher than reality, where 
	you become a pawn of their blindness, a slave of their non-thinking and 
	their evasions, while their intelligence, their rationality, their 
	perceptiveness becomes the enemies you have to dread and flee -- that you 
	do not care to live as a dependent, lest of all a dependent on the 
	stupidity of others, or as a fool whose source of values is the fools he 
	succeeds in fooling -- that honesty is not a social duty, not a sacrifice 
	for the sake of others, but the most profoundly selfish virtue man can 
	practice: his refusal to sacrifice the reality of his own existence to the 
	deluded consciousness of others.

This is a very peculiar response, and you may need to read it several times in 
order to fully grasp what she's saying. (I needed to, at any rate.) What she is 
saying is, nobody should be dependent on anyone for anything, and so, by 
extension, the fraudster is dependent on someone's stupidity for their own 
cash. She has extended "dependence" as far as even depending on the expected 
behaviour of others. Because the rumor-spreader *depends* on the fact that 
other investors will drive the prices up and then down, the rumor-spreader is 
sacrificing their own status as an independent being. 

It's not an *incoherent* response, but it is an *unacceptable* one. Because we 
work together every day. When you drive a car, you are depending on the person 
driving in the lane beside you to be a competent driver who obeys the rules and 
conventions of the road. You depend, as a capitalist, on the farmers who 
actually grow your food to want to trade it for other things, so that your work 
on widgets can translate, at the end of the day, into food on your plate. The 
very harmony of interests which drives libertarian philosophy is a complicated 
interdependence of people -- and Rand's response to fraud is to say that fraud 
is bad because interdependence is bad. 

So, that is my first example of Objectivism turning upon itself. Looked at one 
way, you should promote free capitalism and libertarian politics: but follow 
the Mobius strip far enough, and you will be on the other side, stating that 
nobody should depend on anybody else, lest they sacrifice their independence. 
And it's not like no Objectivist has ever said as much -- Ayn Rand used this 
very ideology to argue why you should not commit fraud as an Objectivist.

I will give an example which Ayn Rand does *not* fully develop, however. 
Objectivism believes that benevolence can come from a rational self-interest. 
But what if *altruism* -- self-sacrifice -- could come from a rational self-
interest? It may sound far-fetched to Objectivists, but in "the battle of 
morality" that Rand was talking about, very few of the modern contenders argue 
that "your life belongs to God" or that "it belongs to your neighbors."

On the one hand, you have figures like the current Dalai Lama, who repeatedly 
advocates for altruism: in his view, compassion and kindness are fundamental 
aspects of human nature which bring us a deep peace of mind, which better 
allows us to calmly, rationally develop ourselves. I might add this example: 
when I see my nephew and niece playing in the snow together, they are smiling 
and kind and happy: but when I see them angry and crying, it is usually because 
they are fighting over who gets to use their latest new toy. And on the other 
hand, you have Protestant Christians who argue that God is real and will bring 
you material success for your piety -- or will grant you vast rewards in a life 
after death. 

Now, notice that if either of these groups are correct, then that is an 
objective fact which is correct for everyone -- and certainly correct for 
Objectivists. It would then be in your rational self-interest to be either 
Other-serving or God-serving, such as the case may be, *even if you are taking 
your life in your own hands*. Self-serving might well mean Other-serving or 
God-serving, if those are better than pure greed at serving the self. In fact, 
it might even be justified for an Objectivist government to *force* you to be 
God-serving -- a theocracy -- if it were indeed a known truth that God rewards 
the pious. Because choosing against your rational self-interest (by choosing 
against God) would be similar to how Rand characterized fraud: and if the 
Objectivist government protects us from fraud, it would stand to reason that 
the Objectivist theocracy might protect us from impiety. 

So the harmony of interests -- which Objectivists largely accept -- is just one 
step down the road which rejects hedonism and promotes helping other people. 
But if reality turns out to be either the way that the Dalai Lama says it is, 
or the way that some Protestant Christians say it is, then Objectivism would 
compel you to accept reality and thus accept either altruism or theocracy. We'd 
find ourselves on the other side of the Mobius strip again, and everything we 
thought was wrong would be upside-down. 

The only solution would seem to be for the Objectivist to assert that they 
*know* that inner peace is not cultivated by helping others, and to assert that 
they *know* that God does not reward the pious. These would seem to be rather 
tall orders for an Objectivist ethics, which still stumbles over the fact that 
most altruists are merely saying "make others happy," not "make yourself sad." 
In the absence of a firm knowledge about the character of reality, the 
Objectivist is left with the statement, "I am against self-sacrifice... unless 
it turns out to be good for me."

To be fair, many Objectivists are very dogmatically atheistic -- I have even 
heard some go so far as to say that they think God is a meaningless term. I 
haven't yet seen any of them stand up to a theologian's complexity, though, so 
it is safe to say that they probably don't know what they're talking about and 
view the possibility of a God as an inconvenience to their worldview. At the 
very least, I would like to ask any Objectivists reading this paragraph: do you 
also dogmatically believe that inner peace doesn't exist? It's a curious way to 
get out from the underlying problem, to say the least.

## How We Move Forward ##

If Objectivism is plagued with inadequacies, how do we move forward? What are 
the parts that are okay about Objectivism, and what are the parts which require 
tweaking?

Well, Objectivists largely have functioning intuitions -- for example, Rand 
correctly identified that fraud was bad, and that it involved dishonesty, which 
is also bad. But these need to be pulled forth as first-class knowledge. Rand's 
famous quote says that "My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a 
heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with 
productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only 
absolute." About the only thing that needs to really be dropped is this last 
pretense that we-the-Objectivists are rational while everybody else is 
irrational.

And it's probably a good thing, because reality often contradicts itself in 
subtle ways. For example, receiving a gift makes you happy, but the people with 
the most stuff aren't generally the happiest people. It is bad to deceive 
people, but sometimes it can serve a greater purpose, such as leading them into 
a surprise birthday party or bringing enemies to a common table so that they 
can negotiate a peace; or it might protect an innocent from a pursuer if you 
deceive the pursuer. Ayn Rand thought that her philosophy would bring her 
happiness, but still struggled with depression after *The Fountainhead* and 
*Atlas Shrugged*. The same fire which brings warmth and thus survival can also 
bring burns and thus death. We swim safely in streams which routinely carve up 
mountains. We often hurt the ones we love most.

I think that we should also abandon the Objectivist's favorite word of 
"philosophy" -- Philosophy is an academic field defined by a tradition of 
philosophical authors and topics, complete with heavyweights like Kant and 
Heidegger. If you aren't going to engage with that massive narrative, then what 
you've got is no philosophy.

At least in my case, I view it as more productive to view my beliefs as 
religious beliefs, and to view the essential purpose of my religion as 
reminding me of the things I already knew but took for granted. I would hope 
that people who read this and choose to distance themselves from Objectivism 
would consider this a similar sort of reminding. 
