# Basic notes on Buddhism


# Hindu roots

Buddhism comes from India, a land where Hindu practice has persisted since 
distant antiquity. Originally the Hindu practice embraced a heaven and a hell
very like the Christian heaven and hell, but they had more or less a similar
problem to what I have with the Christian one: it just doesn't seem credible
if punishment is reserved for a supernatural realm where you exist after your
physical death. There is just something missing from the human story when you 
say that people see judgment in Heaven or Hell. Nonetheless, there was some
notion that a Law of Cosmic Retribution -- called a law of "actions" or, in 
this vocabulary, the Law of Karma. Karma simply means action.

They invented an idea which I myself am very surprised by: samsara, the 
doctrine of death and rebirth. Now instead of feeling your judgment in an 
alternative realm, you feel it here and now, with all of us. You are reborn
into a new body, and cycle from princely to lowly to princely again, and you
have been doing so since time immemorial.

I would draw certain other parallels with samsara. I would identify it with the
cyclic struggles we face in our day-to-day lives, both in a triumph-and-failure
sense and a deeper story about struggling with addictions and cyclic 
preferences. But while the early Hindu sages may indeed have perceived such 
things, it was not the major role of rebirth. The major role of rebirth is 
still "bad people gonna get what's comin' to them."

While we might have thought that a "life in the hereafter" was a pretty sweet
deal, the religions of India don't seem to have taken it that way. Instead they
approach samsara with a characteristic *weariness*. While you might enjoy an
oasis of success here or there, it eventually dries up and you are left to 
wander the bleak featureless deserts of samsara again afterwards. Especially 
when you led a tough life -- as that of a beggar or that of a peasant -- the 
prospect of an eternal succession of tough lives was a hard pill to swallow, 
even though it enables this narrative where the wicked are really punished.

Into this there is a religious tradition of the Sannyasa, mainstream Indian 
asceticism. You undergo a symbolic death, lay away all of your possessions, and
wander the land begging up food and meditating, seeking true liberation from 
samsara. This comes in ceveral ways: sometimes it comes as becoming one with 
the Brahman, with ultimate reality, so that somehow you are transported beyond
samsara. In another sense, you try to live without any karma whatsoever, so 
that when the universe figures out where to send you, you have no attachment 
to the world and it essentially "divides by zero", crashing the construct of 
karma. In any case, socially and legally you "have already died." 

The buddha Siddhartha Gautama, also known as shakyamuni, led a privileged life
as an Indian prince due to the prompting and protective nature of his father.
As the story goes, at 29, suspecting that material wealth was somehow not his 
purpose in life, he went to walk among the people. He was apparently very 
sheltered: here he first saw a very old man and asked his charioteer what was
wrong, and the charioteer had to explain how everyone was getting old! He also
saw in this vision a sick man, a corpse, and a sannyasin. In some sense I 
suppose he saw himself, the world, the future of this path, and the "proper way
out". He chose to follow that way. He left his wife and children behind, to 
follow a "sannyasa" tradition instead.

After some training, he joined a group of six which were convinced that the 
key was not just the symbolic death of the self, but really killing the self 
tangibly. Gautama nearly starved himself to death. Feeling great pangs of 
dizziness, one day he faltered and nearly drowned while he was bathing. This
near-death experience seems to have convinced him that he was clearly on the
wrong path, that he needed a "middle way" between the sannyasa traditions and 
self-mortification.


Buddhism separates into a bunch of different paths over a very long time. They
go like so:

    - Theravada Buddhism, Classical Buddhism, followed the ex