I got to see MIT 8.224 lecture 2, "Exploring Black Holes". It's a seminar where
the professor just asks, "okay, what questions do you have about black holes, I
will try to answer all of them." I thought this was so fun that I would list
some of my own idle speculations.

If electrons are point particles, why aren't electrons in their own event
horizons? Maybe they are. It could be why they are all identical or so, why spin
angular momentum seems so different from normal angular momentum, etc. On the
other hand, electrons are way way lower than the Planck mass -- perhaps the
ultimate theory of quantum gravity prevents black hole formation beneath the
Planck mass. (Certainly if an electron were within its own black hole you'd have
tremendous complications from Hawking radiation, which would cause evaporations
on timescales much much smaller than the Planck time.)

Why don't black holes absorb their own virtual particles? This is a simple
extension of Hawking radiation which is normally conceptualized as the event
horizon swallowing one half of a virtual particle-antiparticle pair. But if you
think of all these virtual gravitons and photons which are meant to pull upon
the rest of the universe, they are in principle being emitted from the black
hole into the rest of space. I asked Penrose about this and he gave a very brief
hand-wavy answer about longitudinal polarizations. I am seriously not sure how
he evades with a polarization the problem that the light cones all tilt inward.

For that matter, Hawking radiation (if I've understood it correctly) predicts
the mass change by looking at the total energy outward, but surely what's being
consumed here is the energy of the vacuum, which is what creates these particle-
antiparticle pairs in the first place -- how does the vacuum "steal" that energy
back from the black hole?

The black hole entropy stuff is really interesting because it suggests that the
black hole as a geometrical object should be viewed 2-dimensionally, not 3-
dimensionally, as a "bubble" of mass in our universe -- indeed all the
information that has ever fallen in should, in principle, be placed on this
surface. How far could we go with a really naive approach -- letting all the
mass be on that surface? I want to be clear: there are two classical approaches
to falling into a black hole; one uses co-moving coordinates and says that you
can fall inside a black hole; one uses far-away coordinates and says that you
approach the surface without actually going in, and the reconciliation of these
is that the "you" that I see falling in gets time-dilated to the point of
stationarity, but the "you" that falls in can of course experience time at their
own rate.

In the latter you already see the essential 2D nature of the black hole, since
I never actually see you fall inside, I just see you freeze in time as you
approach the boundary. Your information, your mass, is still "on the surface."
It also helps if you imagine that you don't go straight in -- then you get
spaghettified and smeared across the surface from my perspective. If it's
anything like a 2D fluid there would be currents and circulations and diffusion
of the information you bring. On the other hand, we face a paradox between the
classical and the quantum: you imagine that the information is proportional to
the mass, but the black hole horizon radius is r = 2 M, while its area is more
like Info ~ r^2. This suggests that information really needs to be viewed as
proportional to M^2 for any chunk of mass falling into a black hole. It suggests
that pairwise information about atoms is how information "really is", so that
M ~ num particles and info ~ particles^2. Is there any way to speak of
*fundamental* information in a system (presumably due to rest mass) which goes
like N^2?

Does quantum noise engulf and claim the information? This is probably the most
fun thing for me: could quantum noise provide an answer to the arrow of time by
simply providing a fundamental mechanism in the universe by which information is
constantly being destroyed? If we want the black hole surface to be homogeneous,
then this is a clever approach.