I wanted to give a brief overview of what it means to think four-dimensionally,
touch upon why it is so seductive, why it is in fact necessary, and why it is
also impossible that the four-dimensional view is the final truth.

# Light Bubbles
First, a basic exercise from special relativity. A very large star spends
perhaps ten million years slowly fusing its hydrogen into helium, and then about
one million years fusing helium into carbon. In the next thousand years it
fuses carbon into neon, and there are a few years involving some other
processes, but in each of these stages, it runs out of energy, and it's steadily
shrinking, increasing in density, as the energy it produces is no longer large
enough to hold it up. Because it's much bigger than our Sun, as the energy
peters out, the only thing keeping the plasma apart -- the unwillingness of
electrons to share the same state -- is not enough on its own to stop the
shrinkageÂ¸ and the star collapses. Over the next month or two, there is a
massive explosion of neutrinos and light which form a big outward explosion.
Much of this goes out towards the rest of the cosmos, announcing that the star
has just gone supernova.

Now I want you to think of this big bubble of light expanding outward into the
cosmos at the speed of light, announcing some event. The bubble remains about a
light-month wide as it expands and thus it gets less dense the larger it gets,
expanding at this uniform speed. Try to visualize all stages of the expansion at
once: when it was small, and as it grew bigger and bigger. You'll begin to see
that the appearance is sort of conical: just like a circle linearly expands into
a 3D cone, a sphere is now expanding into a 4D cone. If you can visualize this
"light bubble" all-in-one-go, then you are seeing the world four-dimensionally.
We sometimes skip one of the space dimensions and draw time instead, and then
this diagram looks like an actual cone.

It's not that time doesn't exist when we look at the world this way, but
everything does have an eerie, static quality.

# Spaghetti-string You

You on the other hand are made up in the 4D picture of a bunch of worldlines
which are almost parallel, twisting and turning and knotting into and out of
your "main body" like a sort of large rope in its surroundings: each breath in
is a bunch of oxygen lines coming into the knot, often working their way into
what we'd call your bloodstream, and then as CO2 coming back out again after a
long trip down the big rope that is you.

How do we anchor your perception of the "now"? There are two alternatives, both
of which are crazy. One is to suggest that there is something else, something
which we might call your soul, which zips across this rope in the forward-time
direction, setting fire to the equations and producing a real experience of now
in-the-moment. Here's why this is crazy: it is solipsism. Even if I'm really
having these experiences there is absolutely no reason for me to think that you
are really having these experiences too. More importantly, the whole physics of
the world is fixed in the worldlines themselves, so my soul can't actually do
anything. It's like the movie projector: it can turn the static film into a
moving, interesting experience, but it can't actually change the content of the
film itself, it has no causal agency on actual process. That doesn't sound very
much like me at all -- at the very least if I'm me, I should be able to control
what I am typing in this essay! This approach suggests that that's an illusion
of control.

What's the other alternative to having an experience of the now? Well, we dealt
with the idea that one point on the worldline has the experience, but what if
*all* points on the worldline have the experience? That's also deeply
unsatisfying because, viewed 4-dimensionally, the world is changeless. Our
experience of change becomes another vast illusion. Imagine, we are literally
stuck in this very moment, constantly thinking that we are moving to the next
moment, and that's all that there is! Nothing *really* changes in the 4D
picture, and your sense of time moving forward is because you are fundamentally
confused about the nature of the past. While all of our words to describe the
past do have a sort of plain meaning on this account, if we're going to be
honest, there are thousands of you each stuck in individual moments, all of them
deluded into a belief in change, none of them actually ever getting out from the
cold and lifeless four-dimensional world.

You could solve some of these problems by slicing the world with a time-plane
and insisting that that plane is the "present" and that the "future" is being
determined by it, while extending the history of the past out backwards. This
nicely solves the problems with the worldlines: only one worldline has
experiences but for all of us it's the same worldline. However, we are not in
relativity constrained to choose a particular "present". Between any two of
these light-bubbles before, the future-cone and past-cone of the supernova,
there is the relativistic present of the supernova: the set of all points which
the light from the supernova has not yet reached. Any "plane" present which goes
through these cones will be acceptable from the supernova's point-of-view. So
there is a valid question of "which present is the present?" which relativity
forbids you from meaningfully answering.

# Phase Space as a Logical Network

The culmination of this essay would be a discussion of phase spaces, especially
Hilbert space. The many-worlds interpretation insists that every point in
Hilbert space with nonzero amplitude is occupied, and I see no reason to assume
that any point in the largest Hilbert space of the universe is impossible. The
normal approach is then to say that when we observe something, we "descend into"
each of the superimposed states by entangling our own conscious state with them.

Here's the reason why this rubs me the wrong way: It's the same as the "the
whole worldline is conscious" approach. Just imbue the whole phase space with
real existence, as a sort of graph, and draw arrows between each of the many
worlds to say "this one becomes that one, becomes this one," and so on. Those
arrows can be amplitudes if you want them to be. Now either we posit some
Cartesian soul which is following this graph, or else we say that in every
parallel universe there is another version of you with its own conscious
experience, again trapped in this point in Hilbert space, believing that the
universe is changing because they are prey to an illusion which they could not
even in principle shake.