# Multiple Particles

Multiple particles present an interesting case in quantum mechanics. We will 
for the moment just take two, separable into states φ and χ. The whole 
wavefunction could thus be written:

    |Ψ> = |φ> ⊗ |χ>

...although for most circumstances it helps to build up a "joint" notation 
where we just write this as:

    |Ψ> = |φχ>

As we've seen in qubits, not all states are separable in this way and in fact 
two qubits can instead take on a lot of states, with four complex numbers given
by:

    A |00> + B |01> + C |10> + D |11>

... while separable qubit states are limited to states of the form:

    (a |0> + b |1>) ⊗ (c |0> + d |1>) = ac |00> + ad |01> + bc |10> + bd |11>.

The general state is thus separable if and only if A D = B C:

    if A == 0: 
        it's trivial; one of the two qubits is |1>.
    else:
        let λ² = |A|² / (|A|² + |C|²): 
            (λ |0> + λ C/A |1>) ⊗ (A/λ |0> + B/λ |1>)

# Indistinguishable Particles in Thermodynamics

What's truly remarkable about nature is that nature cannot tell certain 
particles apart. The first inclination of this fact comes from the entropy of
an ideal gas,

    Ω = h⁻³ⁿ ∫d³ⁿx ∫d³ⁿp
    S = k log Ω

The position integral is held to work out to Vⁿ, while the momentum integral is
a volume of a 3n-dimensional hypersphere, due to the constraint that the energy
is less than E, and the energy is quadratic:
    
    H = Σᵢ pᵢ²/(2 m)
    
The volume of such an n-ball turns out to be:
    
    V(n, R) = π^(n/2) / (n/2)! R^n

...with the analytic continuation value that -0.5 ! = √π. Thus, for example,
the unit 3-ball has volume π^1.5 / (√π * 1/2 * 3/2) = 4π/3. In the case of this
momentum integral the radius is √(2 m E), so:
    
    Ω = V^n (2 π m E / h²)^(3n/2) / (3n/2)!

It is usual to define a thermal wavelength based on this momentum integral:
    
    λ = h / √[4 π m E / (3n)]
    Ω = (V / λ³)^n (3n/2)^(3n/2) / (3n/2)!

Using the approximation log(x!) ≈ x log x − x then gives:

    S = k log Ω = n k log (V / λ³) + 3 n k / 2

Here is the problem: if we were to now put two boxes next to each other, both 
full of the same gas, both in equilibrium, we could slide a partition between 
them arbitrarily. There would be no entropic force on the partition, so there
must be no entropy difference between the two considered separately and the 
two considered together. But this above formula contains precisely such a 
difference! If you double n, V, and E, you do not change λ, but you do change
S:
    
    S → 2 n k log (2 V / λ³) + 3 n k = 2 S₀ + n k 2 log 2

So two containers considered separately contain less entropy than 2 containers
considered together. Indeed, if they had distinguishable gases, those gases 
would mix. But for indistinguishable particles we must modify this approach. 
The appropriate response is to divide Ω by n! to get:
    
    S = n k log [V / (n λ³)] + 5 n k / 2

Thus the inability to distinguish the particles saves us in this case.

# Indistinguishable particles in quantum mechanics

For the quantum version, you introduce a particle-exchange operator:
    
    P |φ χ> = exp(i θ) |χ φ>.

It's clear that any such operator must obey P² = 1: exchange particles twice,
and you must get exactly back where you started. This means that such an 
operator can only be of two forms:
    
    P |φ χ> = ± |χ φ>

Remarkably, nature has decided to obey this principle very precisely via the
'spin-statistics theorem', which says that the proper way to interchange two
integer-spin particles is to always use a + sign for particle exchange, and
the proper way to interchange two half-integer spin particles is to always use
a − sign for particle exchange. The first are called 'bosons' and they obey
'Bose-Einstein statistics', while the second are called 'fermions' and they 
obey 'Fermi-Dirac statistics'. 

Bosons in particular can form a new state of matter predicted by quantum 
mechanics where they all occupy the ground state at once. If everything is in 
the ground state, dissipation must be forbidden by quantum mechanics plus 
conservation of energy. Such states can be manufactured in the laboratory, and
are our present explanation for superfluids like helium-4, where a fluid loses
its viscosity completely. These are called Bose-Einstein condensates.

One of the most startling facts about this is that two fermions can, in 
principle, pair together and act like a particle with integer spin:
    
    Ŝ |↑↓> = Ŝ |↓↑> = 0
    Ŝ |↑↑> = +1 |↑↑>
    Ŝ |↓↓> = -1 |↓↓>

This is observed in atoms: Helium-3 can also form a superfluid, but it requires
a much lower temperature to do so. It is also observed in electrons: the 
current understanding of the phenomenon of superconductivity involves electrons
pairing together in "Cooper pairs", with those Cooper pairs able to enter a 
Bose-Einstein condensate. The exact understanding of how fermions become bosons
is, as far as I can tell, vague and qualitative: but it tends to happen in 
situations where the particles are attracted to within a certain limit. 