It seems like consciousness is somehow rooted in or anchored in change.
Democritus was wrong: it's not just atoms in the void; but the very act of
transitioning between states can feel like something, can create an enduring
entity which ultimately we think of as ourselves.

This lesson was brought home to me during college at Cornell, where I would
watch a televised drama about people with superpowers, called /Heroes/. In this
drama, a Japanese man named Hiro Nakamura discovers that he has the ability to
manipulate time and space, and in early episodes he stops time, wanders about a
card game he has stopped, changes the distribution of the cards across the
table, and then returns back beside his card-playing friend so that time may
resume.

I of course had many problems as a physicist with what I was seeing. First off,
the room was still well-lit -- the lights did not dim as time stood still. For
that matter, when time resumed, the air did not descend into a flurry of
activity, as he swept all of the air molecules out of the way. For that matter,
Hiro was not holding his breath as he moved around the world. But just as
crucial as what the directors missed, is what they hit: the other card-players
do not notice that time has stood still. Nobody believes that these other humans
are actively conscious about the world as Hiro rigs the card game. If you were
to freeze a person in time, the person, we think, would not be aware of time's
passage, would not think about what was going on. To be aware is to change.

Here's the problem. Many physical theories do not distinguish "now" as a time
when things are legitimately changing over time; and the way things change over
time is fixed and static, something like how the temperature in this room
changes as you go from the floor to the ceiling. And I want to say "no!" -- if
you really and sincerely attend to your experience of the present, you'll find
that things really are changing all around you, that time is some sort of
strange fiction produced when our faculties which perceive a changing world
around us merge with our faculties of longer-term memory. The dance of our
neurons, by virtue of being the right sort of change, the right sort of process,
creates consciousness.

Furthermore, consciousness, we'd like to say, is *physically real* -- there are
real experiments which you can do to distinguish consciousness from
unconsciousness. That's perhaps a tendentious point because we're not at the end
of the analysis yet where I can tell you explicitly what the exact experiment is
which unqualifiedly establishes such a thing, but in terms of physics it is
tremendously important: it means that any theory in physics which is
*mathematically equivalent* to a changeless theory is wrong. In particular this
is one of my main reservations about the many-worlds theory.

What does many-worlds say? Normally, you have a quantum bit in a quantum state
|0> + |1>, you measure it, we say it "collapses" and you are left with either
state |0> or state |1>, both with probabilities 50%. In the many-worlds or
many-minds theory, we do away with this by invoking the idea that the
wavefunction persists over the whole universe, including you. Therefore there is
also a you who sees 0, and a you who sees 1, and really we now have the quantum
state |00> + |11>, where the first number refers to the bit and the second
number refers to you: in the universes where the bit was 1, you saw 1; in the
ones where it was 0, you saw 0. We say that your consciousness has "split" into
two, one which lives in the |0> universe and one which lives in the |1>
universe. Seems like there is therefore real change taking place.

I want to say, no, there isn't. The problem is that you can imagine that the
universe is in a superposition of many states, and the rules of physics say that
given any one state, here are the following states, with certain amplitudes. The
whole picture is fundamentally a bunch of points in a "phase space" of
possibilities, with arrows between them describing which one comes "next". Now
you can step back from *that* picture, and it is utterly changeless. You might
as well say that every possible universe exists and many of them contain copies
of "you" therein, and all of those are conscious by virtue of the arrangement of
their molecules, not by virtue of the processes that those molecules undergo.
Each consciousness would be trapped within one particular "now", would have a
mere illusion of temporal continuity and change, and everyone everywhere would
be perpetually alone. Even if that isn't your preferred description, if the many
worlds approach is very broadly correct, then there is no physical experiment
which can say whether your ontology is right or this other ontology is right.
But this other ontology isn't powerful enough to have consciousness as we
understand it and there should be therefore be physical experiments which prove
it wrong, so they disprove all mathematically equivalent physics as well. There
is something strange about measurement, about the idea that the wavefunction
really does alter into something else. 